Chapter 5. The Weight of Choice.

Three days have passed. The reality of what we've done settles over me like a heavy cloak. I attended the funeral of Isaac Davis, our militia captain, killed at North Bridge. His widow wept. His children - four of them, the youngest just a baby - will grow up without a father. War isn't glorious musket fire and brave speeches. It's widows and orphans and empty chairs at dinner tables.

Some neighbors have already fled, loyal to the Crown, unwilling to take up arms against their king. The Hutchinson family left yesterday for Boston and British protection. We grew up together, but now we're on opposite sides of an unbridgeable divide. How did we reach this point where neighbors become enemies?

Father asks me the hardest question: what are we really fighting for? Is it about taxes on tea? The principle of representation? Or something deeper - the right to govern ourselves, to determine our own future? I think it's all of these things and more. We're fighting because we've become Americans without fully realizing it, and Americans cannot be ruled from across an ocean by a government that doesn't listen to them.

But I worry about what we're creating. Will we simply replace British tyranny with our own? Our talk of liberty rings hollow when we keep human beings in slavery. We speak of equality while denying rights to women and the poor. If we win this war - and it's a tremendous "if" against the world's greatest military - will we live up to the principles we claim, or will we create a new version of the same old injustices?

Tonight, I clean my musket and prepare for whatever comes next. The shot heard round the world has been fired, but the story is far from finished. We've started something momentous - a revolution that might change not just our colonies, but human history itself. Or we might fail, be hanged as traitors, and be remembered as foolish rebels who overreached. Everything is uncertain except this: we've crossed the bridge, burned it behind us, and there's no going back. We're all revolutionaries now, for better or worse, and we'll live or die by the choice we made on Lexington Green and Concord Bridge.