Chapter 2. Lincoln Wins - The South Reacts.

November 6, 1860. Election results arrive by telegraph. Abraham Lincoln has won the presidency. He carried every Northern state except New Jersey (which he split with Douglas). He didn't win a single Southern state - didn't even appear on the ballot in most of them. He won with 40% of the popular vote but a clear majority of electoral votes.

Charleston erupts. Church bells ring. Crowds gather in the streets. But they're not celebrating Lincoln's victory - they're celebrating South Carolina's decision to leave the Union.

The palmetto flag - South Carolina's state flag - is raised across the city. Men wear blue cockades (ribbons) in their hats to show support for secession. Militia companies parade through the streets. There's talk of seizing federal forts and arsenals.

Father comes home from a meeting. "The legislature has called a special convention," he tells Mother. "We'll vote on secession in December. It's really happening."

I ask if war is coming. Father pauses. "Lincoln can't force us to stay in the Union. That would be tyranny. We have the right to govern ourselves. If we leave peacefully, there's no reason for war."

But Mother looks worried. "What if Lincoln doesn't let us leave peacefully?"

"Then we'll defend ourselves," Father says. "But it won't come to that. Once several states secede, Lincoln will have to accept it. The North won't go to war to force us back into the Union."

I'm not so sure. I remember Uncle Tom visiting from Boston last year. He said Northerners would never allow the Union to be dissolved. "You can't just leave whenever you lose an election," he said. Father and Uncle Tom argued so fiercely they haven't spoken since.

December 20, 1860. South Carolina's secession convention meets in Charleston. The vote is unanimous: 169-0 to secede from the United States. We're now an independent republic - the first state to leave the Union.

The news spreads rapidly. Crowds celebrate in the streets. Cannons fire salutes. We've done what we've threatened for decades. South Carolina has seceded.