Chapter 4. The Fort Sumter Crisis.

Charleston Harbor, March 1861. Fort Sumter, a federal fort on an island in our harbor, remains under Union control. Major Robert Anderson commands about 80 U.S. soldiers there. Confederate forces surround the fort from batteries on the shore.

President Lincoln took office on March 4. In his inaugural address, he said he won't interfere with slavery where it exists but will preserve the Union. He says secession is unconstitutional: "No state can lawfully leave the Union." But he also promises not to invade the South unless provoked.

Fort Sumter is the test. If Lincoln abandons it, he accepts Confederate independence. If he reinforces it, it's an act of war. Lincoln decides to send supplies but not weapons - provisions to keep the garrison fed but no military reinforcement.

Confederate President Davis faces a dilemma too. If he allows resupply, it accepts continued federal presence in Charleston Harbor. If he attacks, he starts a war the Confederacy might not win.

I watch from the battery with Father on April 11. Confederate General Beauregard sends a message to Major Anderson demanding surrender. Anderson refuses but says they'll run out of food in a few days anyway.

That's not good enough for the Confederacy. At 4:30 a.m. on April 12, 1861, Confederate batteries open fire on Fort Sumter. I wake to the sound of cannons. The bombardment lasts 34 hours. We fire thousands of shells at the fort. Buildings catch fire. The barracks burn. Anderson's men take shelter in the lower level.

Miraculously, no one is killed in the bombardment. On April 13, with the fort in ruins and fires raging, Anderson surrenders. Confederate forces allow him to evacuate his garrison with full military honors.

I watch the American flag come down from Fort Sumter. The Confederate flag goes up in its place. Charleston celebrates like we've won a great victory. But I feel uneasy. We've fired on the United States flag. We've started a war. There's no going back now.