Chapter 5. The Nation Chooses Sides.

April 15, 1861. President Lincoln responds to Fort Sumter's fall by calling for 75,000 volunteers to suppress the rebellion. He's calling us rebels. He's asking Northern states to provide troops to invade the South.

The effect is immediate. The Upper South states - Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas - had resisted secession. But they won't provide troops to fight against other Southern states. Within weeks, all four secede and join the Confederacy.

Virginia's secession is the most significant. It's the most populous Southern state, the wealthiest, the most industrialized. Richmond becomes the Confederate capital. Robert E. Lee, offered command of the Union army, resigns his U.S. commission and joins Virginia. "I cannot raise my hand against my birthplace, my home, my children," he says.

The Confederacy now has eleven states. But four slave states stay in the Union: Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri. Lincoln works desperately to keep them. Maryland, surrounding Washington D.C., is crucial - losing it would isolate the capital. Kentucky controls the Ohio River. Missouri controls the Mississippi River.

In Charleston, the war fever is intense. Thousands of young men volunteer for the Confederate army. They think the war will be short - one big battle, and the Yankees will give up. "We'll whip them in three months," Father says. He's too old to enlist, but my older cousin James joins a Charleston regiment.

I'm fifteen, too young to enlist yet. Part of me is relieved. Another part feels guilty for not being more eager to fight for our new nation.

Mother cries when James leaves. "It won't be as easy as they think," she says quietly to me. "The North has more people, more factories, more railroads. They won't let us go without a terrible fight."

The Union has 22 million people. The Confederacy has 9 million, of whom 3.5 million are enslaved. The North has most of the factories, railroads, and banks. The South has cotton - "King Cotton," we call it - which we believe will bring Britain and France to our aid.

Two nations now occupy the space that was once the United States. The Confederacy believes it's fighting for independence and self-government, like the American Revolution. The Union believes it's fighting to preserve the nation and prove that democracy can survive.

I stand on the battery in Charleston Harbor, looking at Fort Sumter flying the Confederate flag. A war has begun that will determine America's future. Neither side knows it will last four years, cost 750,000 lives, and end slavery forever. We think we're fighting for our rights and our way of life. History will judge whether we were on the right side.