Chapter 3. The Armies Say Goodbye.

April 12. Three days after the surrender, Confederate soldiers formally laid down their weapons. I was there, part of the Union honor guard.

About 28,000 Confederate soldiers marched between two lines of Union troops. They carried their battle flags and stacked their rifles. Then they surrendered their flags - the flags they'd carried through dozens of battles.

It was heartbreaking to watch. These men had fought courageously for four years. They'd endured terrible hardships. They believed in their cause, wrong though it was. Now they were defeated, surrendering the symbols of everything they'd fought for.

Some Confederate soldiers cried. Others were stone-faced. They stacked their weapons with dignity, trying to maintain pride in defeat.

General Joshua Chamberlain - the hero of Little Round Top - commanded the Union troops. As the Confederates approached, Chamberlain ordered his men to carry arms, a salute of respect. The Confederate commander, General John Gordon, responded by dipping his sword in salute and ordering his men to carry arms as well.

It was a moment of mutual respect between enemies. We didn't cheer or celebrate. Grant had forbidden celebrations: "The war is over; the rebels are our countrymen again." We'd fought to preserve the Union. Now we had to reunite it.

After the surrender, Confederate soldiers began the long walk home. Many had hundreds of miles to travel. The Union army provided rations - 25,000 portions of food. Some Union soldiers shared coffee and hardtack with their former enemies.

I talked with a Confederate soldier from North Carolina. He was nineteen, had fought since 1861. "I'm going home to help my family," he said. "We lost the war, lost slavery. Now we have to figure out what comes next."

The war had cost 620,000 American lives - more than all other U.S. wars combined until Vietnam. Entire towns in the South were destroyed. The economy was ruined. Slavery was ended. The United States would never be the same.