Chapter 5. What Might Have Been.

Vice President Andrew Johnson became president on April 15. Johnson was a Tennessee Democrat who'd remained loyal to the Union. But he lacked Lincoln's vision, compassion, and political skill.

Lincoln had been planning "Reconstruction" - the process of bringing Southern states back into the Union and transforming the South from a slave society to a free one. In his second inaugural address, he'd spoken of "malice toward none, charity for all." He wanted to heal the nation's wounds quickly.

But Lincoln also believed formerly enslaved people must have rights. He'd seen Black soldiers fight for the Union - 200,000 of them served after the Emancipation Proclamation. He was considering limited voting rights for Black men, particularly those who'd served in the military or were educated.

Johnson had none of Lincoln's commitment to racial equality. He opposed slavery but also opposed political and social equality for Black people. His Reconstruction policies would be lenient to former Confederates and harsh to formerly enslaved people seeking rights.

I think about what might have been if Lincoln had lived. Would Reconstruction have been more just? Would the promise of the Emancipation Proclamation and the Thirteenth Amendment been fulfilled? Would Black Americans have gained true equality rather than facing a century of segregation and discrimination?

We'll never know. History doesn't reveal its alternatives. But Lincoln's assassination was a tragedy not just for the man but for the nation. His murder robbed America of its best chance for healing and genuine transformation.

The Civil War ended slavery and preserved the Union - enormous achievements. Over 620,000 died to accomplish them. But the war didn't resolve the deeper question of racial equality. That struggle would continue for another century and more.

Standing at Appomattox, watching former enemies shake hands, I felt hope. The war was over. We'd won. Now came the harder work of building a truly united nation based on the principle that all men are created equal. Lincoln understood that challenge. His death made it far more difficult. We would spend the next century learning what we might have accomplished if Lincoln had lived to guide Reconstruction with the same wisdom he'd shown in winning the war.