Chapter 1. The Great War Begins.

I'm James, eighteen years old, and I'm an American soldier in France. The war has been raging since 1914 - four years of brutal combat that has killed millions and devastated Europe.

The war started with the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Hungary in June 1914. Within weeks, Europe's alliance system pulled nation after nation into conflict. Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. Russia mobilized to defend Serbia. Germany declared war on Russia and France. Britain entered to defend Belgium. The Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria joined Germany and Austria-Hungary (the Central Powers). Italy, Japan, and eventually many other nations joined Britain, France, and Russia (the Allies).

The war quickly became a stalemate. On the Western Front in France and Belgium, opposing armies dug trenches stretching from the English Channel to Switzerland. For four years, millions of soldiers lived in those trenches - muddy, rat-infested ditches - launching attacks that gained yards of ground at the cost of thousands of lives.

New weapons made the war horrifically deadly. Machine guns mowed down soldiers attacking across no-man's-land. Artillery bombardments destroyed everything. Poison gas - chlorine, phosgene, mustard gas - choked and blinded soldiers. Tanks, airplanes, and submarines changed warfare forever.

President Woodrow Wilson kept America neutral for three years. "Too proud to fight," he said. Many Americans agreed - this was a European war, not our business. But events pulled us in.

Germany's unrestricted submarine warfare targeted all ships, including American vessels. In May 1915, a German U-boat sank the Lusitania, killing 1,198 people including 128 Americans. Wilson protested, and Germany temporarily halted unrestricted submarine warfare.

But in January 1917, Germany resumed unrestricted submarine warfare, hoping to starve Britain before America could intervene. Then British intelligence intercepted the Zimmermann Telegram - a German message to Mexico proposing an alliance. If Mexico attacked the United States, Germany would help Mexico reclaim Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.

Americans were outraged. On April 6, 1917, Congress declared war on Germany.