Chapter 2. Over There - American Doughboys in France.

"Over there, over there, Send the word, send the word over there, That the Yanks are coming, the Yanks are coming... And we won't come back till it's over, over there."

George M. Cohan's song captures American enthusiasm as we entered the war. We called ourselves "doughboys" - the nickname for American soldiers. We were confident, enthusiastic, and completely unprepared for what we'd face.

I enlisted in May 1917, trained for six months, and shipped to France in November. The troopship was crowded and uncomfortable. Many soldiers got seasick. But we were excited. We'd heard stories about heroism and glory. We thought war would be an adventure.

Arriving in France shattered our illusions. The trenches are hell on earth. Imagine living in a muddy ditch, four feet wide and six feet deep, for weeks or months. Rats everywhere - some as big as cats, feeding on corpses. Lice infest our clothes and hair. When it rains, trenches flood. We stand in water for days, developing trench foot - a painful condition where feet swell and rot.

The smell is indescribable: mud, sweat, unwashed bodies, latrines, poison gas, and death - the sickly sweet smell of decomposing bodies in no-man's-land that we can't reach to bury.

The noise is constant. Artillery bombardments shake the earth. Shells explode randomly, killing or maiming. We learn to distinguish sounds - the whistle of incoming shells, the different calibers of guns, the rattle of machine gun fire.

Going "over the top" - leaving the trench to attack - is terrifying. Officers blow whistles. We climb ladders and run across no-man's-land toward enemy trenches. Machine guns open fire. Men fall by the dozens. Artillery shells explode. Those who reach the enemy trench fight with rifles, grenades, and bayonets.

Attacks rarely succeed. We might capture a few hundred yards at the cost of thousands of lives. Then the enemy counter-attacks and retakes the ground. The front barely moves, but the casualty lists grow longer every day.