Chapter 2. The Muckrakers Expose Corruption.

Progressive reform is powered by investigative journalists called "muckrakers" - President Theodore Roosevelt's term for journalists who "rake the muck" of society's problems.

Ida Tarbell writes "The History of the Standard Oil Company" (1904), exposing how John D. Rockefeller built his monopoly through ruthless, often illegal tactics. Her detailed reporting turns public opinion against corporate monopolies.

Lincoln Steffens writes "The Shame of the Cities" (1904), exposing political corruption in city governments. He shows how political machines like New York's Tammany Hall trade political favors for money and votes.

Upton Sinclair writes "The Jungle" (1906), a novel about meatpacking workers in Chicago. He intends to expose worker exploitation, but readers are horrified by his descriptions of unsanitary meat processing:

"There was never the least attention paid to what was cut up for sausage... There would be meat stored in great piles in rooms; and the water from leaky roofs would drip over it, and thousands of rats would race about on it... A man could run his hand over these piles of meat and sweep off handfuls of the dried dung of rats... This is no fairy story and no joke; the meat would be shoveled into carts, and the man who did the shoveling would not trouble to lift out a rat even when he saw one - there were things that went into the sausage in comparison with which a poisoned rat was a tidbit."

Public outrage forces Congress to act. The Pure Food and Drug Act and the Meat Inspection Act pass in 1906, establishing federal regulation of food and drugs. Sinclair later says, "I aimed at the public's heart, and by accident I hit it in the stomach."

Jacob Riis photographs tenement life in "How the Other Half Lives" (1890), showing middle-class Americans the poverty, overcrowding, and suffering in immigrant neighborhoods.

These muckrakers don't just report problems - they create political pressure for reform. They prove that investigative journalism can drive social change.