Chapter 5. An Unjust War.

Looking back, I see the Mexican-American War as a dark chapter in American history. We provoked a weaker neighbor into war, conquered half their country, and took their land. We claimed Manifest Destiny and moral superiority while acting like any other conquering empire.

President Polk got everything he wanted - California, New Mexico, settlement of the Texas border. America gained ports on the Pacific, rich mineral deposits, fertile valleys, access to trade with Asia. We've become a continental power stretching from sea to sea. In practical terms, the war was a huge success.

But morally? We attacked a weaker neighbor and took their land. We killed thousands to satisfy territorial ambitions. We broke Mexico as a nation - they'll struggle with political instability and economic weakness for generations, partly because we stripped away their richest provinces. We acted as conquerors, not liberators.

And we've poisoned ourselves in the process. The territory we gained has intensified the slavery crisis that will tear our nation apart. Within fifteen years, we'll be fighting a far bloodier war among ourselves over whether slavery can expand into these territories. The Mexican-American War will lead directly to the Civil War.

Ulysses S. Grant, who fought in Mexico and will later command Union armies, will call this "one of the most unjust wars ever waged by a stronger against a weaker nation." I agree. We won the war but lost our moral standing. We gained territory but lost our innocence.

Standing in occupied Mexico City, watching American soldiers celebrate, I feel ashamed. Manifest Destiny is just a pretty name for empire. We're no different from the European powers we claim to oppose - we just use different rhetoric. We speak of freedom while conquering. We proclaim democracy while denying it to others. We invoke God's will to justify our greed.

History will remember the Mexican-American War as a successful land grab. But some of us who fought it know the truth: it was conquest dressed as destiny, imperialism wrapped in patriotism, and injustice disguised as providence. We won Mexico's land but lost America's soul.