Chapter 5. Planting Seeds.

Standing in Seneca Falls at the close of the convention, I understand we've started something that will outlive us all. We're not demanding immediate change - we know that's impossible. We're planting seeds that future generations will harvest.

The Declaration of Sentiments gives the women's rights movement its founding document, its statement of principles, its catalogue of grievances. Like the Declaration of Independence, it doesn't create immediate change but establishes ideals to strive toward. America didn't achieve the equality its Declaration proclaimed in 1776 - and still hasn't fully achieved it. But having proclaimed those ideals made hypocrisy visible and change possible.

We're applying America's founding principles consistently. If "all men are created equal" and possess "inalienable rights," then either women aren't fully human, or they possess those rights too. America must either grant women equal rights or admit its founding principles are lies. We're forcing that choice.

I think about my future daughters and granddaughters. They'll grow up in a different America, one where women can vote, own property, pursue education and careers, participate fully in society. They'll take for granted rights we're ridiculed for demanding. They might not even know about Seneca Falls, might not remember the women who fought so they could be free.

But that's okay. We're not doing this for recognition. We're doing it because it's right, because current injustices are intolerable, because we believe in America's promise even when America doesn't. We're doing it so future women won't have to - so they'll inherit rights as their birthright rather than having to fight for them as we do.

The fight for women's rights has begun. It will take decades, face setbacks, divide allies, exact costs from its advocates. But it will succeed because its cause is just and its logic irrefutable. The question isn't if women will gain equal rights, but when. Today at Seneca Falls, we declared that "when" should be now. Our great-granddaughters will complete what we've started. And that's enough.