Chapter 3. The Peninsula Campaign - Frustration.

Spring 1862. McClellan's Peninsula Campaign began with promise and ended in frustration. We landed over 100,000 troops on the peninsula between the York and James Rivers, planning to march up to Richmond, just 70 miles away.

But McClellan moved cautiously, always overestimating Confederate strength. He spent weeks besieging Yorktown, though it was lightly defended. When Confederates abandoned it, we pursued slowly. Confederate forces under General Joseph Johnston retreated toward Richmond, and McClellan followed at a crawl.

By late May, we could see Richmond's church spires. We were so close! Then Johnston attacked at Seven Pines. The battle was chaotic and bloody but inconclusive. Johnston was wounded, though, and Jefferson Davis replaced him with Robert E. Lee.

That change would prove significant. Lee was aggressive where Johnston had been cautious. Within weeks, Lee launched the Seven Days Battles - a series of attacks that drove us away from Richmond. We lost more men than Lee did, but McClellan panicked and retreated to the James River.

I was in those battles. The fighting was more intense than Bull Run. At Gaines' Mill, Confederate forces attacked our position repeatedly. The noise was deafening - thousands of rifles firing, artillery booming, men screaming. We held our position for hours before being ordered to retreat.

At Malvern Hill, the final battle of the Seven Days, we repulsed massive Confederate attacks. They charged across open ground into our artillery fire - slaughter worse than anything I'd seen. We won tactically but retreated anyway because McClellan lost his nerve.

The Peninsula Campaign failed. McClellan blamed Washington for not sending reinforcements. Lincoln blamed McClellan for being overcautious. We'd gotten within sight of Richmond but accomplished nothing except losing thousands of men.

The campaign taught me that generals matter. McClellan was brilliant at organization but terrible at fighting. Lee was the opposite - aggressive, willing to take risks. Unless we found better generals, this war would last years.